Libvirt VM
==========

This role configures and creates (or destroys) VMs on a KVM hypervisor.

Requirements
------------

The host should have Virtualization Technology (VT) enabled and should
be preconfigured with libvirt/KVM.

Role Variables
--------------

- `libvirt_vm_default_console_log_dir`: The default directory in which to store
  VM console logs, if a VM-specific log file path is not given. Default is
  "/var/log/libvirt-consoles".

- `libvirt_vm_default_uuid_deterministic`: Whether UUID should be calculated by
  hashing the VM name. If not, the UUID is randomly generated by libvirt when
  the VM is defined. Default is False.

- `libvirt_vm_image_cache_path`: The directory in which to cache downloaded
  images. Default is "/tmp/".

- `libvirt_volume_default_images_path`: Directory in which instance images are
  stored. Default is '/var/lib/libvirt/images'.

- `libvirt_volume_default_type`: What type of backing volume does the instance
  use? Default is `volume`. Options include `block`, `file`, `network` and
  `volume`.

- `libvirt_volume_default_format`: Format for volumes created by the role.
  Default is `qcow2`. Options include `raw`, `qcow2`, `vmdk`.  See `man virsh`
  for the full range.

- `libvirt_volume_default_device`: Control how device appears in guest OS.
  Defaults to `disk`. Options include `cdrom` and `disk`.

- `libvirt_vm_engine`: virtualisation engine. If not set, the role will attempt
  to auto-detect the optimal engine to use.

- `libvirt_vm_emulator`: path to emulator binary. If not set, the role will
  attempt to auto-detect the correct emulator to use.

- `libvirt_cpu_mode_default`: The default CPU mode if `libvirt_cpu_mode` or
  `vm.cpu_mode` is undefined.

- `libvirt_vm_arch`: CPU architecture, default is `x86_64`.

- `libvirt_vm_uri`: Override the libvirt connection URI. See the
  [libvirt docs](https://libvirt.org/remote.html) docs for more details.

- `libvirt_vm_virsh_default_env`: Variables contained within this dictionary are
  added to the environment used when executing virsh commands.

- `libvirt_vm_clock_offset`. If defined the instances clock offset is set to
  the provided value. When undefined sync is set to `localtime`.

- `libvirt_vm_trust_guest_rx_filters`: Whether to trust guest receive filters.
  This gets mapped to the `trustGuestRxFilters` attribute of VM interfaces.
  Default is `false`

- `libvirt_vms`: list of VMs to be created/destroyed. Each one may have the
  following attributes:

    - `state`: set to `present` to create or `absent` to destroy the VM.
      Defaults to `present`.

    - `name`: the name to assign to the VM.

    - `uuid`: the UUID to manually assign to the VM. If specified, neither
      `uuid_deterministic` nor `libvirt_vm_default_uuid_deterministic` are used.

    - `uuid_deterministic`: overrides default set in
      `libvirt_vm_default_uuid_deterministic`

    - `memory_mb`: the memory to assign to the VM, in megabytes.

    - `vcpus`: the number of VCPU cores to assign to the VM.

    - `machine`: Virtual machine type. Default is `None` if
      `libvirt_vm_engine` is `kvm`, otherwise `pc-1.0`.

    - `cpu_mode`: Virtual machine CPU mode. Default is `host-passthrough` if
      `libvirt_vm_engine` is `kvm`, otherwise `host-model`. Can be set to none
      to not configure a cpu mode.

    - `clock_offset`: Overrides default set in `libvirt_vm_clock_offset`

    - `enable_vnc`: If true enables VNC listening on localhost for use with
      VirtManager and similar tools

    - `enable_spice`: If true enables SPICE listening for use with
      Virtual Machine Manager and similar tools

    - `enable_guest_virtio`: If true enables guest virtio device for use with
      Qemu guest agent

    - `volumes`: a list of volumes to attach to the VM.  Each volume is
      defined with the following dict:
        - `type`: What type of backing volume does the instance use? All
          options for `libvirt_volume_default_type` are valid here. Default
          is `libvirt_volume_default_type`.
        - `pool`: Name or UUID of the storage pool from which the volume should be
          allocated. Required when `type` is `volume`.
        - `name`: Name to associate with the volume being created; For `file` type volumes include extension if you would like volumes created with one.
        - `file_path`: Where the image of `file` type volumes should be placed; defaults to `libvirt_volume_default_images_path`
        - `device`: Control how device appears in guest OS. All options for
          `libvirt_volume_default_device` are valid here. Default is
          `libvirt_volume_default_type`.
        - `capacity`: volume capacity, can be suffixed with k, M, G, T, P or E when type is `network` or MB,GB,TB, etc when type is `disk` (required when type is `disk` or `network`)
        - `auth`: Authentication details should they be required. If auth is required, `username`, `type`, and `uuid` or `usage` will need to be supplied. `uuid` and `usage` should not be both supplied.
        - `source`: Where the remote volume comes from when type is `network`. `protocol`, `name` and `hosts_list` should be supplied. `port` is optional.
        - `format`: Format of the volume. All options for
          `libvirt_volume_default_format` are valid here. Default is
          `libvirt_volume_default_format`.
        - `image`: (optional) a URL to an image with which the volume is initalised (full copy).
        - `checksum`: (optional) checksum of the `image` to avoid download when it's not necessary.
        - `backing_image`: (optional) name of the backing volume which is assumed to already be the same pool (copy-on-write).
        - `image` and `backing_image` are mutually exclusive options.
        - `target`: (optional) Manually influence type and order of volumes
        - `dev`: (optional) Block device path when type is `block`.
        - `remote_src`: (optional) When type is `file` or `block`, specify wether `image` points to a remote file (true) or a file local to the host that launched the playbook (false). Defaults to true.

    - `usb_devices`: a list of usb devices to present to the vm from the host.

      Each usb device is defined with the following dict:

        - `vendor`: The vendor id of the USB device. 
        - `product`: The product id of the USB device.
      
      Note - Libvirt will error if the VM is provisioned and the USB device is not attached.

      To obtain the vendor id and product id of the usb device from the host running as sudo / root with the usb device plugged in
      run `lsusb -v`. Example below with an attached Sandisk USB Memory Stick with vendor id: `0x0781` and product id: `0x5567`

      ```
      lsusb -v | grep -A4 -i sandisk

        idVendor           0x0781 SanDisk Corp.
        idProduct          0x5567 Cruzer Blade
        bcdDevice            1.00
        iManufacturer           1 
        iProduct                2 
      ```

    - `interfaces`: a list of network interfaces to attach to the VM.
      Each network interface is defined with the following dict:

        - `type`: The type of the interface. Possible values:

            - `network`: Attaches the interface to a named Libvirt virtual
              network. This is the default value.
            - `direct`: Directly attaches the interface to one of the host's
              physical interfaces, using the `macvtap` driver.
        - `network`: Name of the network to which an interface should be
          attached. Must be specified if and only if the interface `type` is
          `network`.
        - `mac`: "Hardware" address of the virtual instance, if absent one is created
        - `source`: A dict defining the host interface to which this
          VM interface should be attached. Must be specified if and only if the
          interface `type` is `direct`. Includes the following attributes:

            - `dev`: The name of the host interface to which this VM interface
              should be attached.
            - `mode`: options include `vepa`, `bridge`, `private` and
              `passthrough`. See `man virsh` for more details. Default is
              `vepa`.
        - `trust_guest_rx_filters`: Whether to trust guest receive filters.
          This gets mapped to the `trustGuestRxFilters` attribute of VM
          interfaces.  Default is `libvirt_vm_trust_guest_rx_filters`.
        - `model`: The name of the interface model. Eg. `e1000` or `ne2k_pci`, if undefined
           it defaults to `virtio`.
        - `alias`: An optional interface alias.  This can be used to tie specific network
           configuration to persistent network devices via name.  The user defined alias is
           always prefixed with `ua-` to be compliant (aliases without `ua-` are ignored by libvirt.
           If undefined it defaults to libvirt  managed `vnetX`.
    - `console_log_enabled`: if `true`, log console output to a file at the
      path specified by `console_log_path`, **instead of** to a PTY. If
      `false`, direct terminal output to a PTY at serial port 0. Default is
      `false`.

    - `console_log_path`: Path to console log file. Default is
      `{{ libvirt_vm_default_console_log_dir }}/{{ name }}-console.log`.

    - `start`: Whether to immediately start the VM after defining it. Default
      is `true`.

    - `autostart`: Whether to start the VM when the host starts up. Default is
      `true`.

    - `boot_firmware`: Can be one of: `bios`, or `efi`. Defaults to `bios`.

    - `xml_file`: Optionally supply a modified XML template. Base customisation
      off the default `vm.xml.j2` template so as to include the expected jinja
      expressions the role uses.

N.B. the following variables are deprecated: `libvirt_vm_state`,
`libvirt_vm_name`, `libvirt_vm_memory_mb`, `libvirt_vm_vcpus`,
`libvirt_vm_engine`, `libvirt_vm_machine`, `libvirt_vm_cpu_mode`,
`libvirt_vm_volumes`, `libvirt_vm_interfaces` and
`libvirt_vm_console_log_path`. If the variable `libvirt_vms` is left unset, its
default value will be a singleton list containing a VM specification using
these deprecated variables.

Dependencies
------------

If using qcow2 format drives qemu-img (in qemu-utils package) is required.


Example Playbook
----------------

    ---
    - name: Create VMs
      hosts: hypervisor
      roles:
        - role: stackhpc.libvirt-vm
          libvirt_vms:
            - state: present
              name: 'vm1'
              memory_mb: 512
              vcpus: 2
              volumes:
                - name: 'data1'
                  device: 'disk'
                  format: 'qcow2'
                  capacity: '400GB'
                  pool: 'my-pool'
                - name: 'debian-10.2.0-amd64-netinst.iso'
                  type: 'file'
                  device: 'cdrom'
                  format: 'raw'
                  target: 'hda'  # first device on ide bus
                - name: 'networkfs'
                  type: 'network'
                  format: 'raw'
                  capacity: '50G'
                  auth:
                    username: 'admin'
                    type: 'ceph'
                    usage: 'rbd-pool'
                  source:
                    protocol: 'rbd'
                    name: 'rbd/volume'
                    hosts_list:
                      - 'mon1.example.org'
                      - 'mon2.example.org'
                      - 'mon3.example.org'
                - type: 'block'
                  format: 'raw'
                  dev: '/dev/sda'

              interfaces:
                - network: 'br-datacentre'
              
              usb_devices:
                - vendor: '0x0781'
                  product: '0x5567'

            - state: present
              name: 'vm2'
              memory_mb: 1024
              vcpus: 1
              volumes:
                - name: 'data2'
                  device: 'disk'
                  format: 'qcow2'
                  capacity: '200GB'
                  pool: 'my-pool'
                - name: 'filestore'
                  type: 'file'
                  file_path: '/srv/cloud/images'
                  capacity: '900GB'
              interfaces:
                - type: 'direct'
                  source:
                    dev: 'eth123'
                    mode: 'private'
                - type: 'bridge'
                  source:
                    dev: 'br-datacentre'


Author Information
------------------

- Mark Goddard (<mark@stackhpc.com>)
